Let's talk about the pros and cons of waterfall so it will provide a better
foundation regarding the benefits of moving to kanban.
Let's talk about the advantages of the traditional waterfall approach.
Waterfall is best used for simple, unchanging projects.
Its linear, rigid nature makes it easy to use and
allows for in‑depth documentation.
Well, not necessarily bad at all.
Here are some other advantages.
It's rather easy to use and manage.
Because the waterfall model follows the same
sequential pattern for each project, it is easy to use and easy to understand.
Waterfall is also a well‑defined model,
and each phase has specific deliverables and reviews,
so it's easy to manage and control.
Discipline is enforced. Every phase in waterfall has a clean start and endpoint,
and it's easy to share progress with stakeholders and customers. By
focusing on requirements and design before writing code,
the team can reduce the risk of a missed deadline.
Also, it requires a well‑documented approach.
Waterfall requires documentation for every phase, resulting in better
understanding of the logic behind the code and tests.
It also leaves a paper trail for future projects or if stakeholders need
to see more detail about a certain phase. And lastly,
waterfall just may work for you in some instances.
But in general,
the capabilities of waterfall have so many shortcomings that using lean,
agile, Scrum, kanban, and other new techniques may greatly
improve your outcomes. Now remember, executives,
CEOs,
chief financial officers need to know things, like when will it be done,
how much will it cost, how much money will I make?
These are all valid and critical questions any quality
executive would ask and need to know.
So these business drivers from executives also contributed to the design and
usage of waterfall and traditional project management methods.
The pitfalls of the traditional or waterfall approach. As we
know, requirements are a moving target,
either because business is constantly changing or the customers
and users don't always know what they want.
Change is a fact of business life. Always has been,
always will be. So,
given that, how would we be able to write and
complete a full set of requirements?
Is it really possible to do? Likely impossible. There are lots of wasted
resources with traditional waterfall‑ish approaches.
After a few months, well, life happens.
That is,
requirements change, people come and go,
organizations and priorities can change,
which drives rework, thus throwing away code that was developed and tested.
There is much more waste in this scenario than people realize, much more.
All this churn certainly drives an increase in defects and lowers quality,
thus consuming even more resources, labor and money,
and this also means loss of opportunity by missing a window for
a new market or product since those resources were diverted and
even wasted. Earlier in my career, I knew no better, but now I do.
Deciding what to do next with waterfall is not very clear
cut and varies across organizations.
Requirements are developed in one big chunk,
and it is not always clear who gets to work on what or who should do
what part of the requirements. Work is divided,
say, across to development teams for system design and implementation.
Teams are typically not multi‑disciplined either. That is,
the analysts are on one team,
the programmers on another, and QA yet on another team. Then you
needed a change management process to capture new or changing
requirements while the project is underway.
Those changes are then interjected or even forced into the work efforts,
causing, at times, considerable stress, maybe even chaos, and quality issues.
I know, I have lived through this. Not fun. The change in
requirements are captured and managed within a repository,
a requirements repository.
And this is if you are lucky. Most times requirements
management is really mismanagement.
And when development is done,
then quality assurance performs validation against the requirements.
And then, once again, handed off to production.
Now everything here is a handoff and thrown over the wall,
so to speak. Not the most productive process, as you can see.